Before you grab your pitchforks,
I am going to keep the Fairphone 5 around.
I am a big believer in their mission
to build more repairable, more sustainable,
and more ethically sourced phones.
And with software updates planned all the way through 2031,
there is plenty of time for improvements,
which is good because of things like this.
What is this?
To be fair to Fairphone, according to a January email,
the two handsets that were delivered to us
on August 31st, 2023 are final prototypes
and not part of the retail production run
that started shipping to customers two weeks later.
Fairphone revealed that in the ramp up to full production,
they turned up some cases of bad soldering,
mic failures, and antenna issues
that were solved for the mass production run.
So the units we evaluated
aren't technically mass production units,
but none of the changes that Fairphone disclosed
were likely to impact our experience with the device.
Anyway, with that grain of salt out of the way,
let's just rip the bandaid off
and tell you about our sponsor.
Mellatrix, their all new Boog 75
is a fully assembled, ultra customizable aluminum keyboard
with pre-lubed magnetic switches and stabilizers
so you can boogie all night long.
And by boogie, I mean, use your cool keyboard.
Just listen to how good it sounds.
Right out of the box,
I was immediately enamored
with the optional transparent back.
It looks so cool.
It's plastic, so you don't have to worry about it
shattering and it effortlessly pops off
so you can get to the battery and the rest of the guts.
It's like a little trip back in time,
but in a really good way.
Migration to the Fairphone was painless
and I love the fingerprint sensor
being built into the power button on the side.
Okay, that's the old fashioned way of doing things,
but it is so much faster than an underscreen sensor,
especially the one I was using on the LG Wing.
Speaking of old fashioned though,
there is a lot going on here
that's less quaint and more, what year is it?
For instance, peering through the transparent back,
I found no obvious signs of wireless charging.
And while it's not the kind of thing that I use that often,
it still feels like a bit of a bummer.
And I feel the same way about the placement
of the nano SIM and micro SD slots.
They are under the battery.
I mean, don't get me wrong.
I'm grateful they're included at all.
And the battery is not glued in,
making it super easy to remove.
But why do I need to power down my phone
in order to pop in an SD card?
Flipping things over, the display is fine, I guess.
I noticed a yellow tint to it when it's off axis,
more than I'm used to seeing on a modern OLED.
And just like the Fairphone 4,
the bezels are as large as they are non-uniform
with the top and bottom having at least
an extra C of thickness compared to the sides.
Though, that is nothing compared to the profile
of you with this bad boy.
Damn, boy!
It's about on par with my wife's S23 Ultra.
And that's with a dbrand protective case installed on it.
And it comes with a weight to match.
212 grams, or about seven and a half freedom ounces.
At least we accounted for that
when we designed our new LTT lounge pants.
So comfy and available now at lttstore.com.
You know what else feels like time travel?
I can't remember the last time I did a phone review
and I felt like I needed to have a performance
and responsiveness section.
I mean, maybe I've been spoiled by more premium devices,
but the Fairphone 5 really did feel more
like my ancient Note 9 than a modern phone.
We conducted our labs testing alongside both a Pixel 8,
which was chosen for its comparable price
and a Galaxy Note 5 that had a new battery
and a fresh install of Lineage OS
in order to put the performance of the Fairphone
in the appropriate context.
And that is exactly as flattering as it sounds.
We're gonna have all three phones linked down below.
Honestly, I think our biggest surprise was the Note 5.
Not in every way, mind you.
Its gaming performance wasn't amazing.
It's eight years old and doesn't even support
all the latest and greatest graphics extensions.
But for general phone, chat, browser use,
it's pretty darn responsive.
About on par with the Fairphone 5
to the untrained observer,
at least if you don't turn the 90 Hertz display on
on the Fairphone 5.
Though there are some reasons that we wouldn't do that
and we'll talk about those later.
Now, of course, the Fairphone did beat out the Note
in more of our controlled tests,
but not by as much as you'd expect.
And against contemporary competition,
the Fairphone fares even worse.
Not only did the Pixel 8 outperform it
in all but one of our tests,
the one test where it didn't lose
was the time to fully charge the battery.
And even then it was a tie.
Also, once charged, the Pixel lasted twice as long
before it was fully discharged.
Ah, that's why 90 Hertz is off by default.
This probably comes down to Fairphone's
unorthodox choice of SoC.
They went with the Qualcomm QCM6490,
which TLDR, is not a phone chip.
Rather, it's optimized for long-term industrial
and commercial IoT applications.
It's a cool chip.
It supports an impressive list of wireless technologies,
including Wi-Fi 6E with 8x8 multi-user MIMO,
which is absolutely unheard of in a phone.
And crucially, it will enjoy long-term support
from Qualcomm, enabling Fairphone to continue
to provide updates to this thing for years to come.
Unfortunately, it's Cryo 670 cores
are based on older ARM designs
that just can't compete with modern chips.
Though to be honest with you,
the raw performance was far from my only issue
with this thing.
Remember that fingerprint sensor that I started out loving?
Both it and the volume buttons are not actually proud enough
to be easily found by touch,
and I was constantly pressing one
when I meant to press the other.
The vibration is inexcusably weak
compared to our challengers,
making it easy to miss a phone call
when it's sitting in my pocket,
and compounding this issue,
while the maximum ringer volume of 87 decibels
is right on par with the comparison phones,
the Fairphone 5's minimum ringer volume is 71 decibels.
That is about 15 decibels higher than the competition,
which is perceived as almost three times as loud.
That is really, really loud.
So my options were to either miss my calls
by having it on vibrate,
or annoy the heck out of everyone around me.
Now admittedly, I can be a bit of a special case,
at least that's what my mom says,
but guys, I can't be the only one who needs to know
when someone is trying to get ahold of me,
and this alone was enough to be a deal breaker.
While we're talking about special me,
I've been daily driving Samsung phones for a long time,
and I have developed a bit of a preference
for how Samsung does things,
which led to my next deal breaker.
On the Fairphone, I cannot move the back button
over to the right side.
I'm sorry, but without that,
this lands squarely in the neat phones
that will never be my daily driver pile.
Making matters worse,
I can't even move the stock Google widget up and down
without using a custom launcher.
Really?
And guys, I am just getting started on the skin.
A long press doesn't present an uninstall option for an app,
just app info.
I missed call screening on this thing.
A lot.
Screenshot editing and sharing sucks,
and Plex would just stop responding entirely,
very regularly.
Though admittedly, that could be Plex
just being a steaming pile of garbage.
And, this is just a pet peeve of mine,
I couldn't find any way to have it automatically proceed
when the correct pin is entered.
I get it, pressing okay is a security feature,
but I don't like the extra keystrokes.
On top of all that, I experienced a significant amount
of just downright buggy behavior,
with the worst being audio problems.
I think what was happening was that,
even though the Fairphone lost its headphone jack
in the great Bluetooth war,
it would sometimes experience phantom headphone jack syndrome,
making it so that both the speaker
and the earpiece would stay silent.
It's really bizarre.
Like on a phone call, I could get it to work in speaker,
and then if I was watching a YouTube video,
I would get no audio at all.
So the hardware's working.
Fairphone told us this was an issue
that they saw in early devices,
but then every time I experienced it,
a reboot would clear it up,
which indicates to me that it's a software issue.
Let us know in the comments, by the way,
if you've run into this with your Fairphone 5.
Let's see, what else?
Oh, the screen brightness bounced around
like my kids at a birthday party.
From our testing, it looks like Fairphone
doesn't do anything to smooth out the sensor data
or the transitions between their brightness levels,
and they also use a fairly small variable
to store the ambient brightness reading
compared to other phones.
The result is very distracting,
especially when you're watching content
in a dimly lit room
where the light from the phone's own screen
bouncing around the room and hitting the sensor
will cause it to constantly change
as it switches from one scene to the next.
Camera, didn't use it a ton,
but when I did, the results were oversaturated,
over-sharpened, and generally over-processed.
I mean, don't get me wrong,
it's a lot better than my ancient Note9
as far as rear camera quality goes,
but if you put it up against anything modern
like the Pixel or an S23 Ultra,
there's just no comparison.
I also found that the dynamic range
and auto-exposure of the selfie camera,
especially for shooting videos, was not amazing.
It's just, it's the kind of thing that tier ones
spend a lot of time and money on,
and I feel like we just kind of take for granted
until we don't have it.
To be clear, there were positives too.
The running apps notification in the shade, kind of nice.
Okay, I kid, there are more of them.
The repairability, legitimately really cool,
and they've obviously put considerable effort
into making things as straightforward as possible
if you need to replace a part.
But if I'm being honest,
I feel like they've almost overshot the mark
and they've made some unnecessary compromises.
Compared to our humble Note 5, for example,
other than the initial hassle of removing the back,
it's not actually that much harder to work on.
I mean, you need to give it a bit of a drink
of isopropyl alcohol to release the adhesive on the battery,
but after that, it's a pretty easy swap.
You got the same ribbon cables,
the same tiny screws, tiny plugs.
They're all the same size,
but Samsung did it without turning their phone
into a freaking weapon.
For that, you had to wait for the Note 7.
Ayo, ancient Zing, Samsung.
It kind of seems to me that by going the extra mile
and turning everything into modules,
Fairphone has solved some problems,
but they've also created some new ones,
leaving them with a device that is, in their own words,
a fair phone, not a great phone.
And unless you desperately wanna support their mission
or your needs are extremely basic
and you just like spending more money,
I don't know how to craft a recommendation for this thing.
I mean, maybe if they turned the SoC RAM and storage
into a module as well,
so you could swap that out and upgrade it.
Even then, a part of me would feel so much better
just steering you toward rescuing an old Note 5
from the shelter,
rather than adopting a brand new one of these
and steering you toward our sponsor.
Manscaped, when the overgrowth is starting
down in your undergarden,
cut it away with Manscaped's Lawnmower 5.0.
Its trimmer blade and foil blade are interchangeable,
letting you choose between basic buzz cut or pitbull smooth.
Not the dog breed, the guy who shouts,
Dale!
The Lawnmower 5.0 even comes with an LED light
to navigate through those more voluminous spots
as you conduct your hunt for the red October.
It also charges conveniently with a USB-C cable.
Couple that with its portability
and you can whack the weeds anywhere you might be,
though please check any local statutes
on public weed whacking beforehand.
Check out the Lawnmower 5.0 at manscaped.com slash tech tips
and use code tech tips for 20% off and free shipping.
If you guys enjoyed this video,
the Fairphone 5 isn't available in North America yet,
so hey, why not check out our review
of the last gen Fairphone 4.